---
layout: post
title: all the t's
---
_Fiction. Part of "a god in glass" series._

_Other parts of the series in order:_

_[prologue, or the end of all things](https://winterflower.github.io/2020/03/02/prologue-or-the-end-of-allthings/)_

_[nicholas(nick)](https://winterflower.github.io/2020/06/01/nicholas-a-god-in-glass/)_

_[troublemakers](https://winterflower.github.io/2019/04/14/troublemakers/)_

I rarely worked with other women.
Instead I worked with lots of men named T[redacted].

My direct line manager was T. He wore a suffering expression,
avoided all conflict and confrontation. His lukewarm
personality extended, it seemed, into the pale colour
of his skin and the weak handshake he gave me when we first
met at the interview. 

The second T I met was the complete opposite.
If the first T, my manager, was a pale pencil
drawing, this T was the embodiment of the
words "smooth operator", in love
with his own handsomness, his well-fitting suits
and crew-neck sweaters. 

He filled me up with hot air and got me to accept and offer
that underpaid me severely in comparison with my colleagues
on the same team and with the same job titles. 
More to himself than to me, he justified this glaring
discrepancy with a half-mumbled "We have to be fair to the people who
have been here longer".
I realised he was an expert at massaging, twisting and turning the truth - a fact, that no
doubt had made him excellent at his job and earned him the VP title. 

In fact he was so good that even he himself believed those beautiful
sentences that sold the corporation as some kind of techologist
heaven to stupid naive girls like me.

All I else, I could forgive, except the fact that he had somehow
made me accept an offer where I was at a disadvantage and then spun
it as some great accomplishment. 

"It would be good for your career to spend the next five years
at the same company, here", he said as he shepherded me out of the door.

The third T was in a class of his own and an unlikely character 
on the floors of the corporation. 
He reminded me of a gruff, scruffy old sailor.
He didn't take well to people. His first words for me were
"How's your programming skill". He thought he was all about the
no-bullshit, but all he ended up being was a rude asshole.

Sometimes I went to speak to him about work and he didn't even look
at me. Just continued typing at his workstation as he uttered
an answer in short, curt sentences. 

He had favourites on the floor, of course. Up and coming, 
career-hungry public school boys from the Home Counties.
He held them in great esteem, appointed them to do
important, prestigious tasks, let them speak to stakeholders, 
lead meetings and meet clients. 

Sometimes in his mannerisms I detected racist undertones. 
They were never overt, maybe perhaps even subconscious, but they
were there nonetheless, in the way he spoke, in his body language. 

At Christmas, I burnt the midnight oil, while all around me
the cubicle farm was nearly-empty, littered with half-eaten 
Waitrose mince pies and boxes of Christmas chocolate. 
I was in my chair, working with a debugger, determined to 
prove myself in a thorny investigation of a bug that afflicted the booking
of a certain class of European financial instruments.
The bug caused a painful downstream issue that had
to be manually rectified every time by a small, very stressed
assistant, Jennie. 

I felt bad for her, for all the stress she had to endure, because
our technology was so unstable and unreliable. 

In the tech department, the men complained about her
incompetence and then compared her to Jimmie, a young man
who they went out drinking with and with whom they constantly
traded small favours in the hierarchy of the corporation. 

Gruff T's protege came up to me one day. We were working
on a new functionality that would hopefully make Jennie's life
easier. He sat next to me and said, in a matter of fact voice as though
the matter was solely up to him and already decided, as though he
was somehow privy to the internal workings of the cruel machinery that made
some have more money than god and trampled others, that Jennie would
never become a trader, but Jimmie would. 

Jennie got stressed and made mistakes, Jimmie didn't. 
I wondered how much of his assessent was based on, was clouded by, the fact
that he regularly went out drinking with Jimmie, but I held my tongue.

In those words, in miniature, was the whole cruel hierarchy
of the corporation. 

I doubled down. I put in extra effort in investigating
the bug for Jennie, because, you know women supporting
women and all of that, not that it made much of a difference here.

I imagined myself in her shoes, that small, stressed woman, being
yelled at by testosterone and entitlement with a good-measure
of emotion-stripping British public school education or
polo-playing American Ivy League education, dressed up in a white
collar shirt, tight dress pants and Italian leather shoes.

I had the pleasure of meeting the particular specimen that
Jenny worked with a few weeks into the project.

Gruff T himself, in an unprecedented act of generosity or maybe
a desire to throw me under a double-decker,
took me downstairs. He had listened to me, with
increasing irritation, as I explained what I had uncovered
in my investigation of the bug, then said "come on". 

I had already been on the trading floor a few times and found it
a noisy, racuous place, where boys (for they were still
mostly boys) got to play at being kings. 
In some places, this vast space had a vaguely male
smell, the same kind that lingered on my bed and pillows
after a night of rough sex.

There were gym bags and sweaty, smelly sneakers and t-shirts
spilling out of the said gym bags onto the stained, carpet floor,
abandoned coffee cups, by the dozens on some desks, rows upon rows 
of them. Miniature blue mold blooms sprouted in the curdled remains.

Large TV monitors played Bloomberg on repeat and every now and then
the chatter in the room was punctured by a loud ringing of a bell
or a cartoonish yeehaw cowboy sound. It was very fitting
for the general tenor of the place. This was a wild west where
the hopeful and the ruthless who believed in grabbing the oyster
and tearing it to shreds went on to win millions (or at least, so they
made it seem).

So gruff T took me downstairs to where the dragons were,
marched me past rows upon rows of desks and monitors
to the front of the floor and deposited me in front of
P - the man whose capricious software was responsible
for this whole debacle. P held two boxes of sushi in his hands
while talking to someone and gesticulating wildly.

I watched the maki and the nigiri jump around the box.
Then after a good five minutes he finally noticed us, placed
the boxes on the table, wiped his hand on his dress pants
and offerred his hand to me.

I tried my best to explain to him what the problem was,
but very soon he grew bored of listening to me,
opened up the window and started showing me the bug while
complaining. I tried to interject feebly and gruff T, sensing
that I was about to royally embarrass myself and the whole
department, promptly thanked P and carted me off back to my own floor.

He sat down next to me, called over a colleague and began discussing
the bug as though I wasn't even there. After half an hour or so, 
satisfied that they would not notice my absence, I slunk back to my own
desk, wrote up my findings in an email and sent it off.
A week later the bug was fixed, I had earnt some respect in the eyes
of my colleagues, but more than ever I felt like an outsider. 


_If you like my writing, please consider [subscribing to my newsletter](https://tinyletter.com/winterflower). It would mean a lot to me!_
